[this version is not yet corrected to match what I actually said -- gnu]

Subject: Freedom of Speech in Software (ApacheCon speech notes)
Date: Wed, 14 Oct 1998 02:36:49 -0700
From: John Gilmore <gnu@toad.com>

Most people at this conference have spent some time looking
at the concept of free software.  But closely allied to that
concept is the concept of freedom of speech in software.   Free
software (or open source software) cannot exist without freedom
of speech in software.

Freedom of speech means the absence of censorship.  Each speaker or
author is free to speak or write on topics of their own choosing, to
audiences of their own choosing, in their own choice of language and
their own choice of words, without hindrance from the government.

Software has been written for years without general examination of its
free speech aspects.  So far, attempts to censor software have
carefully been couched in other terms, such as "creation of patent
rights", "restrictions on export of defense trade goods", or
"outlawing circumvention of intellectual property protection
technologies".  However, the constitutional theories about software
that these special cases are creating will come to control
whether the government can censor *all* kinds of software.

Movies started off being treated by the courts as mere flickering
light-machines run by businesses, that they were free to regulate.
(Mutual Film in 1915).  It took almost 35 years to overturn that
model, seeing them as a medium of expression for which regulation was
forbidden.

A straightforward look at software will show clearly how it deserves
First Amendment protection.  Software is written by humans, like fully
protected books or magazine articles.  It is designed to be read by
humans -- any program which is NOT readable by humans quickly falls
into disuse, since it can't be maintained.  Programs are filled with
ordinary human language, in the form of comments and names.  Programs
are copied and sold by "software publishers", just as books are copied
and sold by ordinary publishers.


Why haven't we noticed freedom of speech in software until now?

The essence of free speech is the publication of communicative words.
Software was originally published in such forms only in tiny
quantities, such as in the Algorithms section of the Communications of
the ACM magazine, since it was painful to manually punch these
programs into cards for use with a computer.  Still, they were
published for readers to examine and understand.

The next major stage was publication on computer-readable media, such
as floppy disks or tapes.  Such publication was expensive, and was
frequently done by proprietary companies who only published binaries,
not human-readable sources, though IBM's mainframe software was
readily available in source code (in the days when IBM hardware was
required to run it).  A few user's groups published freely available
source code, such as SHARE, DECUS, and the Sun User Group.  The free
speech issue did not tend to arise; like moving pictures, people
thought of these tapes as "business machinery" rather than "creative
works of authorship".

With the spread of the Arpanet, Usenet, and eventual Internet and Web,
there arose a natural publishing medium for programs.  FTP sites,
newsgroups such as net.sources, and mailing lists allowed the
creation, distribution, and widespread public collaboration in
software source code.  The Unix system was a major piece of software
that evolved this way, but its proprietary licensing limited authors'
freedom to publish both the original Unix code and their modifications
to it.

In 1984, the GNU Project started building a large body of freely
publishable code, and a large set of worldwide collaborators, using
the Internet publishing and collaboration medium.  This set of people
discovered some of the value of having freedom of speech in software.
The quality, broad usability, and evolutionary speed of their "open
source" software were much easier to create than in un-publishable
proprietary software.


Challenges to freedom of speech in software

Joni Mitchell said "You don't know what you've got til it's gone".
We noticed the topic of freedom of speech in software when the government
started trying to remove our freedom.

Software patents were the first attempt we noticed.  Open source
advocates such as Richard Stallman founded the League for Programming
Freedom to fight for their right to write and publish any program they
wish to write.

Phil Salin opposed software patents on free speech grounds, claiming a
government monopoly over the use of certain ideas in software was
exactly equivalent to censorship of literary ideas.  This was the
first application of the concept of freedom of speech to software.

    As writings, programs should be protected against any attempt by
    government to license what can be written.  . . .  Such censorship and
    restraint on freedom of expression of software writers is anathema in
    a free society, and a violation of the First Amendment.

    Phil Salin, Freedom of Speech in Software, July 1991

The whole creation of "software patents" as a class of patentable
items is an administrative fiction created by creative misreading of a
1981 Supreme Court decision (Diamond v. Deihr), which actually only
held that the use of software in a hardware invention did not render
the whole thing unpatentable.

These issues still haven't been examined by the courts.  As far as I
know, no patent case that relies on First Amendment protection of
software is in the pipeline.  There may be cases that rest on
fixing the overbroad interpretation of Diamond v. Deihr.


Export controls on cryptographic software are the second case where
the government has tried to control the publication of software.

The government regulates the publication of encryption software in
machine-readable form, or communicating it privately to someone
overseas, as a tool of war.  It is also trying hard to regulate the
domestic use of encryption.

The authors and users of Apache were touched by the censorship of
software.  Apache used to contain "hooks" for inserting encryption
libraries, though it did not contain any encryption software itself.
The National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) wrote the
"httpd" code that Apache was originally based on.  The National
Security Agency informed NCSA in 1995 that it was illegal to publish
httpd on the Web because it contained hooks for adding encryption.
NCSA and the Apache developers removed these hooks under the threat of
felony prosecutions.  (The illegality of these "hooks" is never
mentioned anywhere in the regulations -- it's a fictional creation
of the department that enforces them -- but since there is no
viable method of appealing their decisions, it doesn't matter what
the regulations say.)

Gov't regulated publication of cryptographic software for many years.
Eventually researcher Bernstein took a well documented claim to court
in 1995.  Bernstein federal court decided in favor of free speech
protection in 1996 and 1997. Government appealed; in 1998, being
re-examined by 9th Circuit Court of Appeals.

PGP was published on paper to avoid these regulations, is now legally
sold overseas after scanning it in.

EFF published its Cracking DES book on paper in order to get the
software published legally.  Web publication in the United States is
illegal.  We could have copyrighted the software, but that would not
have permitted it to be published.  Instead we put it into the public
domain, so that foreigners could freely scan it in and publish it on
the Web.  Several of them have done so, which means the online text of
the book is available to everyone.  Free software (not controlled by
copyright) made it possible to have free speech (not controlled by
governments).


Should software be able to be freely published without restraint?

The government claims that the answer is no.  They are arguing in
several current cryptography court cases that since software is
"functional", it can be regulated, despite also being a form of
human-to-human communication.  Their essential argument is that if a
machine can read and act on the information in a program, the program
can be regulated by the government; it doesn't matter how many humans
can also read it.  Reduced to the absurd, it means that as soon as a
machine can read the New York Times, the Times will lose its First
Amendment protection.

If the government's opinion prevails in court, this means that
Congress could decide what kinds of programs can or can't be written,
sold, or published.  Governments could make the use of a particular
operating system mandatory, or forbidden, at their whim.  Software
which threatens sacred cows can be censored, and the authors and
distributors of such softwre thrown in jail.  (Cryptography software
is exactly one such threat to a sacred cow, the spy and wiretap
bureacracy.)  The creation, possession, use, or distribution of
encryption software could be outlawed.  The government could even
prohibit software such as Apache or Mozilla, which permits minors to
view indecent materials -- whether or not a prohibition against
*publishing* those indecent materials would ever hold up in court.

The example of cryptographic software shows the dangers of allowing
arbitrary government control of software.  Today's crypto regulatory
scheme requires that individuals or companies seek government
permission BEFORE publishing certain kinds of software; gives them
endless time to decide, keeping your software unpublished while they
do; each requester gets a private decision on a case-by-case basis, so
you may get a better or worse deal than your competitor; the agency
makes decisions that are flatly contrary to the regulations; yet
there is no way to challenge their decisions because the law and
regulations attempt to forbid courts from examining or overturning
them.  Oh, and the government can change its mind at any time, even
after permitting publication -- shutting down your business by merely
writing you a letter.

If the courts uphold this scheme, Congress and the Executive Branch
will be free to extend similar standardless and discretionary
regulations to all kinds of software.  Today's export controls already
claim to regulate software that does packet-switching (most or all
IP implementations), disassembly from object to source code, and
other readily available functions.  We haven't noticed because
they have not applied these obscure regulations with the fervor that
they show for regulating cryptography.


What's the practical difference?

If software really is protected by the free speech guarantees of the
First Amendment, then there are many procedural protections.  Congress
cannot delegate the power to censor protected expression to the
Executive Branch; any decision to suppress publication must be made by
a court, where there's an impartial opportunity for both sides.

In any a constitutional scheme to regulate protected speech, there
are many hurdles that the government must pass:

	*  The government must clearly define what is legal and what
	   is illegal, in a law that speakers can read, the
	   government can use to decide particular cases, and judges
	   can check.  There must be no room for administrative discretion.

	*  The government must make a very quick decision on whether
	   each bit of speech is forbidden or not.

	*  To be effective for more than a few days, the decision must
	   be backed up by a court, where the speaker can usefully
	   challenge it.

	*  The government must file the court case and bear the burden of
	   proving that the speech is illegal.  The speaker need not
	   file a lawsuit to be permitted to speak, nor be forced to
	   prove that their speech is protected.

	*  The government must prove to the court that the speech would
	   "surely result in direct, immediate and irreparable damage
	   to our Nation and its people."  (Pentagon Papers, 1971)


Call to action

It's easiest to forget about rights when we think we have them.
Mostly, those who lack fundamental rights are the ones who notice
their absence.

As a cryptographer, I have personally noticed the lack of fundamental
rights in software.  I've been doing something about it.  So far
the Executive and Legislative branches have been unresponsive, and
only the courts have taken my message to heart.

Before you too lose your fundamental right to write and publish
software, I encourage you to do something about it.  Think about how
the First Amendment applies to the software that you or your company
writes.  Push the Administration and the Congress to not only
protect *commerce* in encryption software, but to protect *free
expression* and *scientific inquiry* in encryption software.
